Hillary Clinton says she's "thrilled" about Walz joining ticket
From CNN's Sam Fossum
Former Secretary of State and 2016 Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton praised Vice President Kamala Harris’ decision to pick Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz as her running mate, writing on social media that she’s “thrilled” to see him join the ticket.

“I’m thrilled to see Tim Walz join the Democratic ticket. From providing free meals for schoolkids to implementing paid family leave in Minnesota, he’s about doing good in all the ways you can. He’ll be an incredible partner to our first woman president. Let’s go win this,” Clinton wrote in the post which included a photo of school children hugging Walz after he signed into law a bill providing free meals for school kids. 

 
6 min ago
Buttigieg "excited" for what Walz brings to ticket
From CNN's Ali Main
Secretary of Transportation Pete Buttigieg testifies before a committee in Washington, DC, in April.
Secretary of Transportation Pete Buttigieg testifies before a committee in Washington, DC, in April. Kent Nishimura/Getty Images/FILE
Transportation Secretary Pete Buttigieg, who was a contender to be Kamala Harris’ running mate, praised the vice president’s choice of Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz on Tuesday.

“Tim Walz is an exceptionally effective governor — and also great to work with. I’m excited for what his Midwestern voice, military experience, and common-sense values will bring to our winning ticket, and for everything the Harris-Walz administration will deliver for Americans,” he wrote on X. 

Buttigieg also served in the military and has spent time campaigning for Harris in the Midwest, including in Michigan where he now resides with his family.

He is in Maine on Tuesday, promoting the Biden-Harris infrastructure agenda.

 
8 min ago
Most Americans are unfamiliar with Walz, poll released Tuesday shows 
From CNN's Ariel Edwards-Levy
Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz speaks at a press conference in Milwaukee on July 17.
Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz speaks at a press conference in Milwaukee on July 17. Jim Vondruska/Getty Images
Most Americans are unfamiliar with Tim Walz, an NPR/PBS/Marist poll released Tuesday finds.

A 71% majority of US adults have never heard of Walz or are unsure how to rate him – making him even less of a known quantity than fellow running mate finalists Mark Kelly or Josh Shapiro. The poll, conducted August 1-4, finds that 17% of US adults view Walz favorably, with 12% viewing him unfavorably.

The NPR/PBS/Marist poll gives Walz a 31% favorability rating among Democrats, with just 7% in the party rating him unfavorably.

Republican VP pick JD Vance, meanwhile, has seen his ratings fall underwater, with 34% viewing him favorably and 43% unfavorably. In July, the public was closely split — 28% viewed him favorably and 31% unfavorably.

